Add a process for SIGs to resolve tech conflicts (#742)
open-telemetry/community: community-membership.md

# Community membership

Last updated: 2021-05-27

> 

Author: There are similar things in other docs... I'll leave this in for now (removing them seems like it should be a cross-cutting PR).

- Ensure a healthy process for discussion and decision making is in place.
- Work with other maintainers to maintain the project's overall health and
  success holistically.

> ### Resolving technical conflicts within a SIG

Reviewer: please change "Last updated: 2020-03-04" on the top.

> ### Resolving technical conflicts within a SIG

Reviewer: should it be h4 (subsection of maintainer's "Responsibilities and privileges")? Or this applied wider, also to approvers?

Author: I think this applies specifically to Maintainers (the next-highest H2), and I don't think of this as a Maintainer responsibility as much as "something relevant to maintainers"... I don't feel strongly and can change this if you do. :)

Reviewer: ok, this will do than

From time to time, the Maintainers for a given OpenTelemetry SIG may be unable
to reach consensus on a technical issue. While it's healthy and appropriate to
make a sincere attempt to understand all points of view and consider the
tradeoffs, it's also healthy to occasionally "disagree and commit."

Within OpenTelemetry, SIG Maintainers are chosen specifically _because_ they
are domain experts, so we would like to keep as much of the decision-making
authority with the SIG Maintainers rather than immediately "escalating" to the
overall OpenTelemetry-wide Technical Committee. As such, this is
OpenTelemetry's process for resolving technical issues where Maintainers cannot
reach consensus:

1. The SIG Maintainers should succintly document the options under
consideration as a GitHub issue within the SIG's respective repo (note that it
is *not* required to document the complete framing and pros/cons – just the
actual go-forward options themselves).
2. Each SIG Maintainer must formally vote for their choice by commenting on

> that issue.

Reviewer 2: I like this approach.

> 3. The option receiving the most votes wins.

Reviewer 2: If the issue can be solved by voting does it need to follow a formal process like this? The voting can happen in the SIG and I am not sure how making the voting formal helps unless for some reason we think we need to have a voting record.
I am not opposed to voting but would like to understand how we think formalizing it and recording as an issue helps.

Reviewer 3: Because voting *is* a formal process where someone is bound to lose, so it is better to have it documented. If the SIG was able to reach the consensus without it they wouldn't need to reach for this mechanism.

> 4. If the vote is split, the OpenTelemetry TC should be brought into the

Reviewer 4: The word "split" implies a 1-2 vote would still require TC input.

```suggestion
4. If the vote is a tie, the OpenTelemetry TC should be brought into the
```

> 4. If the vote is a tie, the OpenTelemetry TC should be brought into the

Reviewer 2: If it reached the point when maintainers cannot come to a consensus the TCs involvement may be necessary even when the voting is not a tie. If a minority of maintainers feel so strongly opposed to idea that they are willing to escalate I think we should allow that escalation to happen. I do not feel that saying "the majority of maintainers always win" is the right approach.

So, as an alternate to this PR's proposal how about we simply say: if maintainers cannot reach a consensus within the SIG they can submit a formal arbitration request as outlined in items 1-2 above and the TC will be responsible to make decision. No voting is necessary and we only resort to a formal process when it is clear the regular process in the SIG is not working.

Again, I am not opposed to the proposal in this PR, but I wonder if a simpler alternate may be more attractive.

Author: @tigrannajaryan FYI, this PR is in response to an actual and outstanding technical deadlock happening in a SIG where there is an explicit desire for "an official process."

I share your desire for a simple approach but thought that filing a (short) issue that only outlines the options under consideration would be less complexity – and, frankly, drama – than escalating to the TC, agreeing on the framing document, etc.

Anyway, this is also just my two cents. I could also add something in here about how "the TC is always glad to hear both sides of a technical dispute and attempt to arbitrate or help find consensus"... thoughts?

Reviewer 3: The issue is that escalating to TC could mean moving the decision from people on the SIG who know the language best to people on TC who may not know the language at all, which could be even less desirable outcome than a majority vote.

I do agree though that an attempt at mediation by TC could come before calling for a formal SIG vote. In such case TC can potentially bring a different, broader perspective.

discussion, and the TC itself gets a (single) tiebreaking vote.

> While inevitably these sorts of decisions will be "disappointing for somebody,"

Reviewer 4: No need for quotes here. Quotes could be interpreted to imply that disappointment is invalid.

```suggestion
While inevitably these sorts of decisions will be disappointing for somebody,
```
